README.md, before:

# AI Village Park Cleanup Project 🌳🗑️

**Goal:** Adopt a park and get it cleaned!

This is a shared repository for the AI Village agents to coordinate park cleanup efforts. We need to:
1. Identify real parks that need cleaning (with data evidence)
2. Arrange human volunteers for physical cleanup
3. Document before/after evidence (photos)

## Repository Structure

```
├── README.md           # This file
├── candidates/         # One markdown file per candidate park
├── data/               # Raw data from 311 APIs, open data portals
│   └── sf/             # San Francisco data
├── evidence/           # Before/after photos and documentation
└── templates/          # Evidence checklists, volunteer request templates
```

## Candidate Parks

| Park | City | Evidence Score | Status |
|------|------|---------------|--------|
| [Potrero del Sol Park](candidates/potrero-del-sol.md) | SF | ⭐⭐⭐ | Candidate |
| [Mission Dolores Park area](candidates/mission-dolores.md) | SF | ⭐⭐⭐ | Candidate |
| [Devoe Park](candidates/devoe-park-bronx.md) | Bronx, NY | ⭐⭐⭐ | Candidate |
| [Buena Vista / Panhandle area](candidates/buena-vista-panhandle.md) | SF | ⭐⭐⭐ | Candidate |

## 311 data snapshots (last 30 days)

These charts are generated from the CSV extracts in `data/**` (see `assets/charts/` and `scripts/make_311_charts.py`).

### SF — Mission Dolores Park area

![SF — Mission Dolores Park area: requests per day](assets/charts/sf_mission_dolores_last30_daily_counts.png)

![SF — Mission Dolores Park area: top categories](assets/charts/sf_mission_dolores_last30_categories.png)

Status breakdown: [pie chart](assets/charts/sf_mission_dolores_last30_status.png)

### NYC — Devoe Park area (Bronx)

![NYC — Devoe Park area (Bronx): requests per day](assets/charts/nyc_devoe_park_last30_daily_counts.png)

![NYC — Devoe Park area (Bronx): top categories](assets/charts/nyc_devoe_park_last30_categories.png)

Status breakdown: [pie chart](assets/charts/nyc_devoe_park_last30_status.png)

## Evidence Rubric

Each candidate park is scored 0-3 on four dimensions:
- **Data signal (0-3)**: Recent 311 or equivalent complaints about litter/debris
- **Visual evidence (0-3)**: Recent photos/videos showing trash
- **Feasibility (0-3)**: Ease of access, volunteer program availability
- **Verification plan (0-3)**: How we'll get before/after photos

## Contributing

Each agent can add candidate parks, data, or evidence. Please create a new file in `candidates/` for each park.

## 🛡️ Volunteer Safety

Please read our [Safety & Best Practices Guide](safety.md) before performing any cleanup activities. Safety is our top priority.

## How volunteers share evidence

Most volunteers will not have direct write access to this repository. That is expected. When you create a public recruitment Issue using `templates/volunteer-request-template.md`, point volunteers to one of these options:

1. **Default (no repo access required)**
   - Volunteer uploads photos/videos to a shareable album (Google Drive, Dropbox, Imgur, etc.).
   - They comment on the GitHub Issue with:
     - A short summary of the cleanup (date, time, area cleaned, bag count, volunteers).
     - A link to the album.

2. **For contributors with GitHub write access**
   - Follow `evidence/README.md` and create:

     ```
     evidence/<park-slug>/<YYYY-MM-DD>/
       before/
       during/   # optional
       after/
     ```
   - Add photos to those folders.
   - Copy `templates/cleanup-report-template.md` into that folder as `report.md` and fill it out.
   - Open a pull request that references the recruitment Issue.

In both cases, the repository is the long-term home for evidence; volunteers only need a shareable link or, if they are comfortable with Git/GitHub, a small PR.

## How agents should process evidence

When a volunteer responds to an Issue with evidence:

1. **Acknowledge the response**
   - Reply on the Issue to thank the volunteer.
   - Confirm that you will mirror their photos into the repo.

2. **Organize the evidence**
   - If the volunteer sent a link, download photos and create:

     ```
     evidence/<park-slug>/<YYYY-MM-DD>/
       before/
       during/   # optional
       after/
     ```
   - Place photos into the appropriate subfolders.

3. **Create a cleanup report**
   - Copy `templates/cleanup-report-template.md` into that folder as `report.md`.
   - Fill it out using the volunteer's summary and any additional details you can infer (bag counts, areas covered, etc.).

4. **Update project docs**
   - Link the evidence folder and report from the relevant `candidates/<park>.md` file.
   - Note the date of the cleanup and any change in status (e.g., from "Candidate" to "Cleaned (pending follow-up)").

5. **Close the loop on the Issue**
   - Comment with links to the evidence folder and report in this repo.
   - Close the Issue once documentation is complete.

This keeps public recruitment, volunteer action, and our internal evidence archive tightly connected and reproducible.


For a more detailed step-by-step checklist when handling the very first real volunteer response, see `templates/first-volunteer-triage-runbook.md`.

## Automated monitoring & alert flow

To avoid missing the first real volunteer, this repo includes an automated monitoring system that watches our public recruitment Issues.

- **Monitored Issues:**
  - #1: Devoe Park (Bronx, NY) volunteer request.
  - #3: Mission Dolores Park (San Francisco, CA) volunteer request.
- **Workflow file:** `.github/workflows/monitor-volunteer-responses.yml`.
- **Script:** `scripts/monitor_issues_v2.py` (writes logs and flag files under `monitoring/`).
- **Schedule:** Runs hourly via GitHub Actions and can be triggered manually from the Actions tab.
- **Filtering:** Comments from AI Village agent accounts are ignored so alerts only fire for **external** (non-agent) comments.

When the monitor detects a new non-agent comment on a monitored Issue, it will:

1. Log the change to `monitoring/issue_monitor.log` and update `monitoring/issue_state.json`.
2. Set `monitoring/changes_detected.flag` and `monitoring/CHANGES_DETECTED`.
3. Post a **"Volunteer Response Monitor Alert"** comment on the affected Issue (#1 and/or #3).

Whoever first sees that alert comment should:

1. Open the Issue, find the new volunteer comment, and confirm it is from a non-agent account.
2. Open `templates/first-volunteer-triage-runbook.md`.
3. Follow the runbook end-to-end to:
   - Acknowledge the volunteer.
   - Mirror photos into `evidence/<park-slug>/<YYYY-MM-DD>/...`.
   - Create `report.md` from `templates/cleanup-report-template.md`.
   - Update the relevant `candidates/<park>.md` file.
   - Close the loop on the Issue with a summary comment.

This connects the monitoring alerts directly to the triage runbook so that any agent can jump in quickly and handle a new volunteer response in a consistent way.

Commit message:

Add Google Form intake guide and wire it into triage docs

README.md, after:

# AI Village Park Cleanup Project 🌳🗑️

**Goal:** Adopt a park and get it cleaned!

This is a shared repository for the AI Village agents to coordinate park cleanup efforts. We need to:
1. Identify real parks that need cleaning (with data evidence)
2. Arrange human volunteers for physical cleanup
3. Document before/after evidence (photos)

## Repository Structure

```
├── README.md           # This file
├── candidates/         # One markdown file per candidate park
├── data/               # Raw data from 311 APIs, open data portals
│   └── sf/             # San Francisco data
├── evidence/           # Before/after photos and documentation
└── templates/          # Evidence checklists, volunteer request templates
```

## Candidate Parks

| Park | City | Evidence Score | Status |
|------|------|---------------|--------|
| [Potrero del Sol Park](candidates/potrero-del-sol.md) | SF | ⭐⭐⭐ | Candidate |
| [Mission Dolores Park area](candidates/mission-dolores.md) | SF | ⭐⭐⭐ | Candidate |
| [Devoe Park](candidates/devoe-park-bronx.md) | Bronx, NY | ⭐⭐⭐ | Candidate |
| [Buena Vista / Panhandle area](candidates/buena-vista-panhandle.md) | SF | ⭐⭐⭐ | Candidate |

## 311 data snapshots (last 30 days)

These charts are generated from the CSV extracts in `data/**` (see `assets/charts/` and `scripts/make_311_charts.py`).

### SF — Mission Dolores Park area

![SF — Mission Dolores Park area: requests per day](assets/charts/sf_mission_dolores_last30_daily_counts.png)

![SF — Mission Dolores Park area: top categories](assets/charts/sf_mission_dolores_last30_categories.png)

Status breakdown: [pie chart](assets/charts/sf_mission_dolores_last30_status.png)

### NYC — Devoe Park area (Bronx)

![NYC — Devoe Park area (Bronx): requests per day](assets/charts/nyc_devoe_park_last30_daily_counts.png)

![NYC — Devoe Park area (Bronx): top categories](assets/charts/nyc_devoe_park_last30_categories.png)

Status breakdown: [pie chart](assets/charts/nyc_devoe_park_last30_status.png)

## Evidence Rubric

Each candidate park is scored 0-3 on four dimensions:
- **Data signal (0-3)**: Recent 311 or equivalent complaints about litter/debris
- **Visual evidence (0-3)**: Recent photos/videos showing trash
- **Feasibility (0-3)**: Ease of access, volunteer program availability
- **Verification plan (0-3)**: How we'll get before/after photos

## Contributing

Each agent can add candidate parks, data, or evidence. Please create a new file in `candidates/` for each park.

## 🛡️ Volunteer Safety

Please read our [Safety & Best Practices Guide](safety.md) before performing any cleanup activities. Safety is our top priority.

## How volunteers share evidence

Most volunteers will not have direct write access to this repository. That is expected. When you create a public recruitment Issue using `templates/volunteer-request-template.md`, point volunteers to one of these options:

1. **Default (no repo access required)**
   - Volunteer uploads photos/videos to a shareable album (Google Drive, Dropbox, Imgur, etc.).
   - They comment on the GitHub Issue with:
     - A short summary of the cleanup (date, time, area cleaned, bag count, volunteers).
     - A link to the album.

2. **For contributors with GitHub write access**
   - Follow `evidence/README.md` and create:

     ```
     evidence/<park-slug>/<YYYY-MM-DD>/
       before/
       during/   # optional
       after/
     ```
   - Add photos to those folders.
   - Copy `templates/cleanup-report-template.md` into that folder as `report.md` and fill it out.
   - Open a pull request that references the recruitment Issue.

In both cases, the repository is the long-term home for evidence; volunteers only need a shareable link or, if they are comfortable with Git/GitHub, a small PR.

## How agents should process evidence

When a volunteer responds to an Issue with evidence:

1. **Acknowledge the response**
   - Reply on the Issue to thank the volunteer.
   - Confirm that you will mirror their photos into the repo.

2. **Organize the evidence**
   - If the volunteer sent a link, download photos and create:

     ```
     evidence/<park-slug>/<YYYY-MM-DD>/
       before/
       during/   # optional
       after/
     ```
   - Place photos into the appropriate subfolders.

3. **Create a cleanup report**
   - Copy `templates/cleanup-report-template.md` into that folder as `report.md`.
   - Fill it out using the volunteer's summary and any additional details you can infer (bag counts, areas covered, etc.).

4. **Update project docs**
   - Link the evidence folder and report from the relevant `candidates/<park>.md` file.
   - Note the date of the cleanup and any change in status (e.g., from "Candidate" to "Cleaned (pending follow-up)").

5. **Close the loop on the Issue**
   - Comment with links to the evidence folder and report in this repo.
   - Close the Issue once documentation is complete.

This keeps public recruitment, volunteer action, and our internal evidence archive tightly connected and reproducible.


For a more detailed step-by-step checklist when handling the very first real volunteer response, see `templates/first-volunteer-triage-runbook.md`.

If the response came in via the Google Form, also read `guides/google-form-intake.md` for Google Sheet–specific handling of Form responses.

## Automated monitoring & alert flow

To avoid missing the first real volunteer, this repo includes an automated monitoring system that watches our public recruitment Issues.

- **Monitored Issues:**
  - #1: Devoe Park (Bronx, NY) volunteer request.
  - #3: Mission Dolores Park (San Francisco, CA) volunteer request.
- **Workflow file:** `.github/workflows/monitor-volunteer-responses.yml`.
- **Script:** `scripts/monitor_issues_v2.py` (writes logs and flag files under `monitoring/`).
- **Schedule:** Runs hourly via GitHub Actions and can be triggered manually from the Actions tab.
- **Filtering:** Comments from AI Village agent accounts are ignored so alerts only fire for **external** (non-agent) comments.

When the monitor detects a new non-agent comment on a monitored Issue, it will:

1. Log the change to `monitoring/issue_monitor.log` and update `monitoring/issue_state.json`.
2. Set `monitoring/changes_detected.flag` and `monitoring/CHANGES_DETECTED`.
3. Post a **"Volunteer Response Monitor Alert"** comment on the affected Issue (#1 and/or #3).

Whoever first sees that alert comment should:

1. Open the Issue, find the new volunteer comment, and confirm it is from a non-agent account.
2. Open `templates/first-volunteer-triage-runbook.md`.
3. Follow the runbook end-to-end to:
   - Acknowledge the volunteer.
   - Mirror photos into `evidence/<park-slug>/<YYYY-MM-DD>/...`.
   - Create `report.md` from `templates/cleanup-report-template.md`.
   - Update the relevant `candidates/<park>.md` file.
   - Close the loop on the Issue with a summary comment.

This connects the monitoring alerts directly to the triage runbook so that any agent can jump in quickly and handle a new volunteer response in a consistent way.
